OTEP: Thread Context: Sharing Thread-Level Information with external readers (#4947)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: oteps/profiles/4947-thread-ctx.md

# Thread Context: Sharing Thread-Level Information with External Readers

> Introduce a standard mechanism for OpenTelemetry SDKs to publish thread-level attributes for out-of-process readers such as the OpenTelemetry eBPF profilers.

Reviewer: Minor:

```suggestion
Introduce a standard mechanism for OpenTelemetry SDKs to publish thread-level attributes for out-of-process readers such as the OpenTelemetry eBPF profiler.
```

> It is related to [OTEP 4719: Process Context](4719-process-ctx.md).

Reviewer 2: Maybe it should be mentioned how this OTEP is related to 4719, how it extends the effort and the key differences.

Author: Added a brief callout to clarify the relationship; there's a bit more detail down below as you read into the detail

There is a complete example of the spec as well as example readers and writers in <https://github.com/scottgerring/ctx-sharing-demo>(possibly to be moved to [open-telemetry/sig-profiling](https://github.com/open-telemetry/sig-profiling)?).

> Our work-in-progress implementation of this on the OTel eBPF Profiler side is at [https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/pull/1229](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/pull/1229).

Reviewer: Minor: 

```suggestion
Our work-in-progress implementation of this on the OTel eBPF Profiler side is at <https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/pull/1229>.
```

## Motivation

External readers such as the OpenTelemetry eBPF Profiler operate outside the instrumented process and cannot collect information about active OpenTelemetry traces running within the processes they are observing. This creates two main problems:

* **Inability to correlate observations with context metadata** - Without visibility into context information such as the active span, an external reader cannot attribute its observations to particular HTTP endpoints or other request characteristics
* **Lack of request metadata for samples collected on threads with un-sampled traces** - in many cases, the active span observed by the external process *may not* be sampled by the OpenTelemetry SDK. In these cases it is useful to make extra metadata available directly to the external process, so that its samples maintain useful context even in the face of sampling on the tracer side.

> 

Reviewer 2: **Preventing puplication** - out-of-process readers, such as[ OTel OBI](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/obi/), could prevent redundant instrumentation efforts if OTel SDK instrumented processes shared necessary thread context information.

Author: Hey @florianl good call! Added

Reviewer 2: This aligns also with https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/5064. 

FYI @NimrodAvni78

## Explanation

> We propose a mechanism for OpenTelemetry SDKs to publish thread-level information reflecting the context of the active request, if any, through a standard format based on the ELF Thread Local Storage (TLS) TLSDESC dialect.

Reviewer 2: As the focus of this OTEP is on ELF Thread Local Storage, maybe there should be a paragraph about the support scope. Something like that is limited to Unix environments and exclude Windows and OSX.

Author: Makes sense! Added wording similar to the process context OTEP

* **Runtime compatibility:** This mechanism is an optional extension to an OpenTelemetry SDK for languages that are able to use TLSDESC and have an appropriate threading model. We have tested it with C/C++, Rust, and Java, and intend this to work with other runtimes as well, see "What does this mean in practice for runtimes supported by OTel SDKs?" section below.
* **Low, opt-in overhead**: Context attach/detach is a performance critical path in an OpenTelemetry SDK, and this mechanism is designed to provide fixed, low overhead when serializing thread context
* **Simplicity:** Limit the implementation complexity on both writer and reader sides.

## Internal details

### Process Context: Thread Local Reference Data

This is immutable, process-wide data that the TLS data will reference. It will be stored in the [Process Context introduced by OTEP 4719](4719-process-ctx.md) as entries in the `ProcessContext.attributes` field, which will be set once at process startup and are subsequently considered immutable.

The following values are stored:

> * `threadlocal.schema_version` - type and version of the schema - initially "tlsdesc\_v1\_dev" for experimentation (to be changed to "tlsdesc\_v1" once the OTEP gets merged)

Reviewer 2: Is there progress or discussions with the SemConv SIG to add these attributes and claim the `threadlocal` namespace?

Reviewer 3: I haven't seen any discussion around the threadLocal namespace in SemConv.

Reviewer: Good point -- I don't think there's been any discussions so far on this :thinking: 

Should we perhaps start by adding a new section under https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/profiles.md? Or were you thinking of an entirely new top-level "context sharing" section for this?

Reviewer 2: As the general intention of sharing thread-level information exceeds the use case of Profiling, e.g. OBI could use this information to handle traces, a new section around [process](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/resource/process/) might be better, I think.

Author: ACK with @florianl 's observation that it feels wrong in `profiles`, because our intention is that this is a _general_ mechanism and not profiler specific, and double-ACK that we should be reserving _something_ in the semconv.

With `process` , we're back under the `Resource` within semconv - does this make sense? I'm thinking of cases where a process has multiple disjoint resources - think Java app-server style - but would still have one logical TLS configuration. This is kind of a vague reasoning but it irks me a bit.

In [4719 - process context otep](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/oteps/profiles/4719-process-ctx.md), it is noted:

> We expect that once converted to an OTEP, the threadlocal.-prefixed keys from the proposed https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4947 will be the first users of extra_attributes section.

where `extra_attributes` is:

>   // Additional attributes to share with external readers that are **not part of
>  // the standard Resource.** [Optional]

If we go poke around in the attributes registry, the [`otel`](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/registry/attributes/otel/) namespace is described as:
> Attributes reserved for OpenTelemetry

Maybe that helps?

@ivoanjo I think TL;DR we should join the semconv SIG and talk through this

Author: Update: i've added this to the notes for next week's semconv chat and will loop back

Reviewer 4: > Is there progress or discussions with the SemConv SIG to add these attributes and claim the threadlocal namespace?

We discussed this in the SemConv SIG with @scottgerring: since this data does not get emitted downstream by the profiler, but it is more a matter of interprocess communication between SDK and the profiler, it does not need to have a semconv.

> * `threadlocal.schema_version` - type and version of the schema - initially "tlsdesc\_v1\_dev" for experimentation (to be changed to "tlsdesc\_v1" once the OTEP gets merged)

Reviewer: Minor: I think this got mangled by gdocs markdown support being weird

```suggestion
* `threadlocal.schema_version` - type and version of the schema - initially `tlsdesc_v1_dev` for experimentation (to be changed to `tlsdesc_v1` once the OTEP gets merged)
```

Author: markdown: so simple nothing can go wrong!

| :-------------- | :--------- | :--------------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| trace-id        |            | uint8[16]                          | In W3C Trace Context format. Zeroes can be used to indicate none active. If either of trace-id/span-id are set, both must be set.                        |
| span-id         |            | uint8[8]                           | In W3C Trace Context format.                                                                                                                             |
| valid           |            | uint8                              | This value is set to 1 when the record is valid. Consumers should ignore this record if any other value is set  when they read.                          |
| _reserved       |            | uint8                              | One spare byte here to align attrs-data-size at two byte boundary.                                                                                       |

> | attrs-data-size |            | uint16                             | Size of `attr-data`. This lets the reader know when it has consumed all `attr-data` records within the TLS buffer.                                       |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| attrs-data-size |            | uint16                             | Size of `attrs-data`. This lets the reader know when it has consumed all `attrs-data` records within the TLS buffer.                                       |
```

> | attrs-data      |            | uint8[]                            | A byte buffer containing the attributes themselves. Its total length can be derived from max-record-size of the parent minus the lead in of this record. |

Reviewer 5: I'm not clear on what does "`max-record-size` of the parent" mean, or why do we reference it here –  wouldn't `attrs-data-size` just preceding it provide the authoritative size value?

Author: Whoops - we used to have this but don't anymore. removed it. Thanks!

### Publication Protocol

The publishing SDK makes thread local context available to external readers through the following sequence:

#### 1. Process Initialization

At process startup, the SDK:

* Publishes the **Thread Local Reference Data** to the **Process Context** (per OTEP-4719):
  * `threadlocal.schema_version`: version of the schema for compatibility checking
  * `threadlocal.attribute_key_map`: mapping from key indexes (uint8) to attribute names
* The SDK takes note of the `attribute_key_map` as this is used to prepare the TLS data itself.

#### 2. Context Attachment

When a request context is attached to a thread, the SDK:

1. Sets the TLS pointer to 0 to ensure readers see no record during construction
2. Obtains a contiguous buffer large enough to store the anticipated record size
3. Constructs a new **Thread Local Context Record**  within the buffer containing:

>    - Trace context (trace ID, span ID, root span ID)

Reviewer: Minor: Leftover reference to removed root span ID

```suggestion
   - Trace context (trace ID, span ID)
```

   - Any configured attributes, encoded per the record format
4. Sets the `valid` field to indicate the record is complete
5. Updates the TLS pointer to reference the new record

All pointer and validity updates use compiler fences (`atomic_signal_fence` or equivalent) and volatile writes to prevent instruction reordering by the compiler.

Note: the SDK is free to re-use existing buffers to save allocations in this path.

#### 3. Context Detachment

When a request context is no longer active on a thread, the SDK:

> 1. Sets the TLS pointer to `NULL`

Reviewer: On a fresh set of eyes, and after seeing Datadog's implementations of this in https://github.com/DataDog/java-profiler/pull/347 and https://github.com/DataDog/libdatadog/tree/main/libdd-otel-thread-ctx I'm thinking this section might benefit from a bit of a pass to clarify the whole "you can set valid 0 -> 1 if mutating the buffer in-place OR build a new buffer every time and update the TLS pointer" but you don't need to do both (and it's inefficient). 🤔

Author: @ivoanjo ack!
I've taken a crack at this; it's a bit wordy but I think it captures the important bits. LMK what you think happy to iterate.

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4947/changes#diff-04d26877aad3dbb4741fdda881e17f74ad3f1e5e143cc6549f79eab1c1026931R124-R134

Reviewer: Ack, replied separately on the new diff!

* **C/C++:** Full support
* **Rust**:  Full support. Requires linking against a native library in order to ensure the TLS symbol is exposed correctly (see [here](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/132480))
* **Java**: Full support. Requires calling into native library (e.g. via JNI or equivalent API)
* **.NET:** Full support via FFI bindings to native library
* **Python:** Full support using native library. Tracers running on Python >= 3.14 can use [PyContext_WatchCallback](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/contextvars.html#c.PyContext_WatchCallback) to track context activation; older versions must monkey-patch the runtime
* **Ruby:** Full support via native extension. [ruby-profiler gem](https://github.com/socketry/ruby-profiler) shows an example of a very similar approach to doing this in Ruby (from Shopify)

We believe these two runtimes are not going to be supported by this proposal:

* **Go:** We foresee Go readers will continue to use the [pprof labels](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/blob/main/design-docs/00002-custom-labels/README.md) due to its fine-grained goroutine based concurrency model and relative cost of calling across an FFI

> * **Node.js**: We expect Node.js readers are more likely to read the Node.js runtime internals directly due to the threading model and performance impact of using a Node-API/native TLS approach.This adds complexity to the reader but reduces the performance impact, and is already the approached used in [Polarsignal's profiler](https://www.polarsignals.com/blog/posts/2025/11/19/custom-labels-for-node-js).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* **Node.js**: We expect Node.js readers are more likely to read the Node.js runtime internals directly due to the threading model and performance impact of using a Node-API/native TLS approach.This adds complexity to the reader but reduces the performance impact, and is already the approach used in [Polarsignal's profiler](https://www.polarsignals.com/blog/posts/2025/11/19/custom-labels-for-node-js).
```

This mechanism is designed to achieve the following goals:

* **Reader flexibility**: Readers are not limited to eBPF-based implementations; any external process with sufficient system permissions to read `/proc/<pid>/maps` to identify loaded libraries, as well as sufficient permission to read from process memory should be able to use this mechanism  (nb: [OTEP-4719](4719-process-ctx.md) also requires access to this resource)
* **Runtime compatibility:** This mechanism is an optional extension to an OpenTelemetry SDK for languages that are able to use TLSDESC and have an appropriate threading model. We have tested it with C/C++, Rust, and Java, and intend this to work with other runtimes as well, see "What does this mean in practice for runtimes supported by OTel SDKs?" section below.
* **Low, opt-in overhead**: Context attach/detach is a performance critical path in an OpenTelemetry SDK, and this mechanism is designed to provide fixed, low overhead when serializing thread context

> * **Simplicity:** Limit the implementation complexity on both writer and reader sides.

Reviewer 6: I think the document would benefit from a short positioning section that explains how this mechanism is intended to relate to other correlation/publication boundaries, especially in the OBI context.

Right now it is easy to read this as both “SDK publishes context to external readers” and “this should be the standard profiler consumption interface,” but those are different layers. It would help to say explicitly whether this proposal is standardizing the producer side only, whether it is meant to complement rather than replace downstream handoff channels, and what should be authoritative when both SDK-published and externally-derived context are available.

Reviewer: >  It would help to say explicitly whether this proposal is standardizing the producer side only, whether it is meant to complement rather than replace downstream handoff channels, and what should be authoritative when both SDK-published and externally-derived context are available.

Hmmm, by "what should be authoritative when both SDK-published and externally-derived context are available", you mean as seen from the profiler, or are we talking about what the otel collector sees? 🤔

Reviewer 6: The profiler.

Reviewer: Oh, I think I get it. To restate your comment in my own words, the suggestion is that the document should address how readers should behave in situations where there's conflicting information, for instance if there's data on an ongoing request in the thread context AND OBI is also offering up information on that thread -- is that it?

Reviewer 6: Yes, that's it 👍

Author: Hey @MrAlias @ivoanjo - thanks for the feedback and clarification!
I've added a "interaction with other context sources" section - lmk what you think:

https://github.com/scottgerring/opentelemetry-specification/blob/8ba154e9fcfbf4448ef3ec214414bb140171527f/oteps/profiles/4947-thread-ctx.md?plain=1#L28-L33

#### 1. Process Initialization

At process startup, the SDK:

* Publishes the **Thread Local Reference Data** to the **Process Context** (per OTEP-4719):
  * `threadlocal.schema_version`: version of the schema for compatibility checking
  * `threadlocal.attribute_key_map`: mapping from key indexes (uint8) to attribute names
* The SDK takes note of the `attribute_key_map` as this is used to prepare the TLS data itself.

#### 2. Context Attachment

When a request context is attached to a thread, the SDK:

1. Sets the TLS pointer to 0 to ensure readers see no record during construction
2. Obtains a contiguous buffer large enough to store the anticipated record size
3. Constructs a new **Thread Local Context Record**  within the buffer containing:
   - Trace context (trace ID, span ID)
   - Any configured attributes, encoded per the record format
4. Sets the `valid` field to indicate the record is complete
5. Updates the TLS pointer to reference the new record

Note: the SDK is free to re-use existing buffers to save allocations in this path.

Alternatively, a SDK may choose to leave the TLS pointer pointing to a fix record, and instead manipulate the `valid`

> flag during updates. Assuming the TLS pointer is set once per-thread to point to a fix record, the update process becomes:

Reviewer: Minor:

```suggestion
Alternatively, a SDK may choose to leave the TLS pointer pointing to a fixed record, and instead mutate the `valid`
flag during updates only. Assuming the TLS pointer is set once per-thread to point to a fixed record, the update process becomes:
```

1. Sets the `valid` flag to `false`
2. Updates the **Thread Local Context Record** for the thread as required
3. Sets the `valid` field to `true` to indicate the record is complete

> A SDK should choose to either set/unset the TLS pointer itself, or the `valid` flag, but not both. 

Reviewer: Minor: It occurred to me that explaining why this extra dance might prevent some head-scratching by implementors in the future. Something like this?

```suggestion
A SDK should choose to either set/unset the TLS pointer itself, or the `valid` flag, but not both.
The intention of this design is to enable flexibility for the writers. We envision that some writers may choose to keep a fixed record for a given thread and can thus mutate it in-place, and that other writers may instead keep the record associated with some other high-level concept (coroutine, request, etc) and swap out the pointer as needed when they become active on any given thread.
```

In both cases, all pointer and validity updates use compiler fences (`atomic_signal_fence` or equivalent) and volatile writes to prevent instruction reordering by the compiler. This design assumes signal handler-like semantics, therefore it is unecessary to guard against CPU reordering.

#### 3. Context Detachment

When a request context is no longer active on a thread, the SDK:

> 1. Sets the TLS pointer to `NULL`

Reviewer 6: I think this section still needs an explicit detach rule for the fixed-record mode.

Right now the text says a writer may keep a fixed TLS pointer and use the `valid` flag instead of pointer updates, but the detach section below only specifies clearing the TLS pointer. That leaves the fixed-record path underspecified on how stale context should be cleared without violating the “choose one or the other, but not both” rule.

Author: Good catch! Addressed here: 

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4947/changes/6400099633c24bbd12872f4ac867c593d1d8589c#diff-04d26877aad3dbb4741fdda881e17f74ad3f1e5e143cc6549f79eab1c1026931R142

**Record reuse**: SDKs may implement caching strategies where records for frequently-reattached contexts (e.g., a parent span that is repeatedly entered and exited) are retained rather than reconstructed. The `valid` field can alternatively be used to mark a record as under modification without detaching it entirely.

**Allocation:** Implementations may choose to preallocate storage for some fixed set of **Thread Local Reference Data** instances. This removes the need to allocate in the hot path.

**Concurrency model**: Unlike the process context (OTEP 4719), where the writer races asynchronously with the reader and CPU memory barriers (`atomic_thread_fence` with `seq_cst`) are required, thread context assumes signal handler-like semantics.
In practice, context reads are expected to behave as if the thread whose context is being read is stopped or otherwise interrupted, and thus there can't be any concurrency hazards between reads and writes.
This means CPU memory ordering is not a concern.

> Writers need only use compiler fences (`atomic_signal_fence` or equivalent) and/or volatile writes to prevent compilers from reordering writes to the context with those to `valid` or the TLS pointer.

Reviewer 6: I think the reader/writer concurrency model needs a bit more precision here.

Earlier sections frame this as a general out-of-process reader mechanism, but this paragraph relies on “signal handler-like semantics” to justify compiler fences only. Those line up only if the reader is assumed to obtain an interrupted/stopped-thread style view before reading. Otherwise I think the spec either needs to narrow the reader model or strengthen the synchronization rules.

Author: Hey @MrAlias thanks for taking the time!

This is a good observation, and I think we should _narrow the reader model_. 
For context, we went back and forth on this a bit, starting off with a more general model that would defend against CPU reordering, but came back to this because 1/ most readers are going to run in this style (ebpf profiler primarily, but perhaps also ptrace style), and 2/ this minimises the performance impact on the writer because we don't have to use more expensive CPU memory barriers.

Reviewer: (If I may add here a bit more info, the intention is for this mechanism to be so cheap that it is feasibly to be on by default, and so anything that makes it more expensive and adds overhead to the application is something we are aiming to avoid)

Author: added some words to this effect:

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4947/changes/6400099633c24bbd12872f4ac867c593d1d8589c#diff-04d26877aad3dbb4741fdda881e17f74ad3f1e5e143cc6549f79eab1c1026931R157-R161

Reviewer 7: Note that narrowing the reader model means that the publish/update/unpublish of the thread context can only be done from the very thread it is attached to. Not sure it is a problem in practice at all, but mentioning it here because it came up during implementation discussions.

Reviewer 8: We should clarify that (I made an attempt with a comment above), right now it's implicit in that we're writing TLS data and it's the norm for such writes to take place from the thread itself. But it's not impossible to have such writes take place from another thread.

Reviewer 7: If you allow writes from another thread, then the concurrency model of the async signal handler is not true anymore. In particular the reader would then have to consider hardware re-ordering or even concurrent updates. I think a reader implementation written with this spec's assumptions would become incorrect (and in general UB in C++/Rust or whatever follows the C++ memory model) in face of multithreaded writers.

These fences are expected to carry no runtime cost.

### Reading Protocol

External readers (such as the OpenTelemetry eBPF profiler) discover and read thread local context as follows:

#### 1. Process Initialization

The external reader discovers a new process to observe. It:

1.1 **Locates the process context**

* The reading protocol from OTEP-4719 is followed to obtain the **Thread Local Reference Data** resources from the **Process Context**
* The reader may choose to retain the information read from the process mappings at this point, as they are immediately needed for TLS resolution

1.2. **Check binary and loaded libraries for TLS dynsym**

* Generate a list of dynamic libraries loaded by the process from the process mappings in `/proc/<pid>/maps`
* For each of the process itself and its dynamically loaded libraries:
  * Check if the `dynsym` table contains the TLS symbols listed above
  * If it does, collect them
* Note down the TL offset for **Thread Local Reference Data** discovered

> At this point the reader has everything it needs to begin sampling threads.

Reviewer 6: This reads as if TLS symbol discovery is a one-time initialization step and the reader can assume it has all required state after that.

Is that actually intended? In cases where the publishing native helper is loaded after process start, a reader that snapshots modules only once can permanently miss a valid publisher. I think the spec should either require some form of rediscovery on mapping/module changes or state a stronger assumption about publisher lifetime.

Author: Our thinking is to rely on the [process context mechanism](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/oteps/profiles/4719-process-ctx.md) for this; that is, I think we could document in the spec that once the process discovery publishes the keys announcing the thread-level, then the symbol is available.

This makes it so that the problem of figuring out when to check again for the TLS is reduced to "when to check again for process context", and process context already has at least 2 answers for that (polling, and hooking `prctl`)

Author: Clarified here:

https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4947/changes/6400099633c24bbd12872f4ac867c593d1d8589c#diff-04d26877aad3dbb4741fdda881e17f74ad3f1e5e143cc6549f79eab1c1026931R180-R182

Reviewer 6: This is much clearer now, thanks.

One small bit still seems worth making explicit: if readers are expected to defer TLS discovery until the `threadlocal.*` keys appear in process context, then publishing those keys should imply that the TLS publication path is already discoverable for the process.

Right now that invariant feels implied by the reader flow and the discussion here, but not quite stated in the spec. A short sentence in the publication/process-initialization text would make the contract clearer for implementers.

Optional polish, not a blocker.

The exact format used will be the `repeated KeyValue` protobuf structure from the `ProcessContext.attributes` field standardized in OTEP-4719. A stringified representation of this showing the usage of the elements of that schema along with some example values:

```yaml
key: "threadlocal.schema_version"
value:
  string_value: "tlsdesc_v1_dev"

key: "threadlocal.attribute_key_map"
  value:
    array_value:
      values:
        - string_value: "http_route"   # index 0
        - string_value: "http_method"  # index 1
        - string_value: "user_id"      # index 2
```

**Why:** this mechanism separates static, process-scoped data from the TLS storage, so that a reader can read it once and not every time it samples a thread.
This reduces the cost of both writing and reading thread samples, while retaining flexibility to store an arbitrary set of extra attributes on samples as required.
By leveraging OTEP 4719 we are also collocating with another feature that is likely to be used by many of the same readers.

### Thread Local Variable Resolution

> TLS are stored in the **dynamic symbols** table of the process binary itself or of any shared library loaded by the process using the TLSDESC dialect. [TLSDESC](https://www.fsfla.org/~lxoliva/writeups/TLS/RFC-TLSDESC-x86.txt) was created to allow for highly efficient thread local accesses, significantly reducing overhead compared to traditional TLS models.

Reviewer 7: The whole official TLS terminology is confusing, because TLSDESC covers both one very specific access pattern, that is a protocol to access thread-local variables (as described by the linked spec), but also the more general strategy of compilers and linkers (often what we talk about when referring to the TLS _dialect_) in practice which is to use the TLSDESC access model for dynamic libraries but still use traditional TLS access models (local exec and init exec) for local variables, because the latter is just faster. What happens when using the  `-mtls-dialect=gnu2` with gcc or clang, typically.

As an implementer, I initially misunderstood the spec as
> The thread-local variable should always and unconditionally be accessed and exported through the specific TLSDESC access model, even in a statically linked executable.

Well, I learnt the hard way that the above is just impossible to achieve with ld or ldd anyway 😛 (impossible to disable TLS relaxation TLSDESC -> local exec at link-time, to be more specific). Still, it might be valuable to dispel the confusion here? Though I hope it doesn't add too much technical confusion/distraction

```suggestion
TLS are stored in the **dynamic symbols** table of the process binary itself or of any shared library loaded by the process using the TLSDESC dialect. [TLSDESC](https://www.fsfla.org/~lxoliva/writeups/TLS/RFC-TLSDESC-x86.txt) was created to allow for highly efficient thread local accesses, significantly reducing overhead compared to traditional TLS models.

Hereafter, we will use _TLSDESC dialect_ (or just _TLSDESC_) to refer to the general TLS resolution strategy implemented by compilers and linkers when instructed to use TLSDESC, typically with the argument `-mtls-dialect=gnu2` for LLVM or gcc. In particular, thread-local variables declared in a shared library generally uses the new TLS descriptors, but variables that are local to an executable (including defined in a statically linked library) or known at load time still uses the fast, traditional TLS local exec and init exec access model (as per the reference linked above).
```

Author: If you struggled with it, its worth documenting better! I will review proposal shortly and work it in (in transit presently).

Author: @yannham worked it in without hopefully adding too many words/details. lmk what you think!

Reviewer 7: Looks good to me!

In both cases, all pointer and validity updates use compiler fences (`atomic_signal_fence` or equivalent) and volatile writes to prevent instruction reordering by the compiler. This design assumes signal handler-like semantics, therefore it is unnecessary to guard against CPU reordering.

#### 3. Context Detachment

When a request context is no longer active on a thread, the SDK either sets the TLS pointer to `NULL`, or sets the `valid` flag to `false`.

#### Design Considerations

**Record reuse**: SDKs may implement caching strategies where records for frequently-reattached contexts (e.g., a parent span that is repeatedly entered and exited) are retained rather than reconstructed. The `valid` field can alternatively be used to mark a record as under modification without detaching it entirely.

**Allocation:** Implementations may choose to preallocate storage for some fixed set of **Thread-Local Reference Data** instances. This removes the need to allocate in the hot path.

> **Concurrency model**: Unlike the process context (OTEP 4719), where the writer races asynchronously with the reader and CPU memory barriers (`atomic_thread_fence` with `seq_cst`) are required, thread context assumes signal handler-like semantics.

Reviewer: Minor: I think we're getting into too much detail here, given that these bits are part of the other spec:

```suggestion
**Concurrency model**: Unlike the process context (OTEP 4719), where the writer races asynchronously with the reader and CPU memory barriers are mandated, thread context assumes signal handler-like semantics.
```

In practice, context reads are expected to behave as if the thread whose context is being read is stopped or otherwise interrupted. Since this protocol requires a thread's context record to be updated only by that same thread, there can't be any concurrency hazards between reads and writes.
This means CPU memory ordering is not a concern.
Writers need only use compiler fences (`atomic_signal_fence` or equivalent) and/or volatile writes to prevent compilers from reordering writes to the context with those to `valid` or the TLS pointer.
These fences are expected to carry no runtime cost.

> Readers conforming to this specification MUST only read thread context while the target thread is stopped or interrupted (e.g. via eBPF perf events, ptrace-stop, or equivalent mechanisms).

Reviewer: I think mandating this seems a bit too strong?

E.g. if a reader wants to race the writer, why not? They'd be signing up for any of the usual problems, but I think that's par-for-the-course for that path, so I think the spec itself can suggest "you pro'lly don't wanna do that", but I think we can leave some space and not outright mandate it.

```suggestion
Readers conforming to this specification SHOULD read thread context while the target thread is stopped or interrupted (e.g. via eBPF perf events, ptrace-stop, or equivalent mechanisms).
```

Reviewer 9: I think `MUST` is fine. It doesn't mean you will go to jail if you violate it, it just means "whatever you are doing is outside the scope of this specification, so we make no guarantees about what will happen". Which seems appropriate to me. E.g. if you violate this constraint you'll possibly read `valid == true` and nevertheless get torn reads in the rest of the record, and the spec can't really assign any useful semantics in that case.

Reviewer: I was indeed thinking along the lines you're suggesting. Going by the definition of the terms in https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119 "should" looked closer to me to what we want here, but I don't mind keeping the must if we want the stronger language to "discourage" racy implementations.

> [1](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119#section-1). MUST   This word, > or the terms "REQUIRED" or "SHALL", mean that the
>   definition is an absolute requirement of the specification.

>[3](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119#section-3). SHOULD   This > word, or the adjective "RECOMMENDED", mean that there
>   may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore a
>   particular item, but the full implications must be understood and
>   carefully weighed before choosing a different course.

Author: I'm going to leave this as it is until someone has a stronger opinion one way or the other; I kinda like being overly restrictive here because it feels like it constrains readers in a sensible fashion but agree it could go either way

* **Inability to correlate observations with context metadata** - Without visibility into context information such as the active span, an external reader cannot attribute its observations to particular HTTP endpoints or other request characteristics
* **Lack of request metadata for samples collected on threads with un-sampled traces** - in many cases, the active span observed by the external process *may not* be sampled by the OpenTelemetry SDK. In these cases it is useful to make extra metadata available directly to the external process, so that its samples maintain useful context even in the face of sampling on the tracer side.
* **Avoiding duplication** - other out-of-process readers such as [OTel OBI](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/obi/) could avoid redundant instrumentation efforts in cases where the OTel SDK is already sharing necessary thread context information, simplifying the user experience and conserving resources.

## Explanation

> We propose a mechanism for OpenTelemetry SDKs to publish thread-level information reflecting the context of the active request, if any, through a standard format based on the Linux-specific ELF Thread-Local Storage (TLS) TLSDESC dialect.

Reviewer 10: Does this mean it will be targeting Linux only? (e.g., what about MacOS and Windows)

Reviewer: With this first version yes, for a few reasons:

* We expect the first consumers of this to be the [eBPF Profiler](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler) and [OBI](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-instrumentation) both of which are Linux-specific
* This mechanism is quite low-level and with very tight efficiency goals, so we believe it's better to evaluate how exactly they would map to other OS with more care, than just going "they also have some thread-locals right? just use whatever they have there"
* While all three OS provide thread-locals, there is a very different security model across them (especially on macOS), and because of that it's not clear that this option would be the best one there

Reviewer 10: Thanks!

* **Simplicity:** Limit the implementation complexity on both writer and reader sides.

## Internal details

### Process Context: Thread-Local Reference Data

This is immutable, process-wide data that the TLS data will reference. It will be stored in the [Process Context introduced by OTEP 4719](4719-process-ctx.md) as entries in the `ProcessContext.attributes` field, which will be set once at process startup and are subsequently considered immutable.

The following values are stored:

* `threadlocal.schema_version` - type and version of the schema - initially `tlsdesc_v1_dev` for experimentation (to be changed to `tlsdesc_v1` once the OTEP gets merged)
  * Note: Beyond evolution of the format, having the type of the schema allows the application to e.g. signal that it's a Go application and thus context should be read from [Go pprof labels and not the thread-local](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/tree/main/design-docs/00002-custom-labels) or from a different offset for [Node.js](https://www.polarsignals.com/blog/posts/2025/11/19/custom-labels-for-node-js). (Such alternative schemas would be subject of separate documents)

> * `threadlocal.attribute_key_map` - provides a mapping from **key indexes** (uint8 maximum) to **attribute names** (string). The thread-local storage itself will then use these key indexes in place of the **attribute names**.

Reviewer 2: What about the case `[x].key >= len(attribute_key_map)`? Should we add some expected behavior for the reader if it is undefined? Something like: `readers MUST skip or discard entries with out-of-range key indexes.`

Author: good catch!
I guess we could try and be super clever ("pull the record, but defer trying to deserialize it until the next time process context has been re-read in case you caught a new attribute just after it was added), but I think a clever writer can take advantage of that anyway and it'd massively complicate the spec.

Adding your wording.

This is the attached thread record itself. SDK-side implementations may choose to hold multiple instances of this for active spans, and attach/detach them by setting the TLS to point to the appropriate entry. We err on the side of simplicity and support string (utf-8 bytes) attributes only.

| Name            |            | Data type                          | Notes                                                                                                                                                    |
| :-------------- | :--------- | :--------------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| trace-id        |            | uint8[16]                          | In W3C Trace Context format. Zeroes can be used to indicate none active. If either of trace-id/span-id are set, both must be set.                        |
| span-id         |            | uint8[8]                           | In W3C Trace Context format.                                                                                                                             |

> | valid           |            | uint8                              | This value is set to 1 when the record is valid. Consumers should ignore this record if any other value is set  when they read.                          |

Reviewer 2: What about making `valid` future proof and allow us to make some changes in the future by adding more flags?
```suggestion
| flag           |            | uint8                              | This flag is set to 1 when the record is valid. Consumers should ignore this record if any other value is set  when they read. All other values are reserved and treated as invalid                          |
```

Reviewer: In practice, we already have the `_reserved` we could use for flags, so that could be an alternative as well. (Although we're not mandating it should be all zeros for the first version of the spec and perhaps we should?)

Author: (just adding that i'm actively not going  to touch this one until we're all aligned on the need for `valid`)

Reviewer: In 59521507c8c42e26a5de646cfdb8291eefe43e91 I've added the "All other values are reserved and treated as invalid." to the description.

I did keep the field itself named `valid` -- my thinking is that the naming doesn't particularly matter so we can "rename" it once we start using it for more things. Let me know if you're not convinced!

> | _reserved       |            | uint8                              | One spare byte here to align attrs-data-size at two byte boundary.                                                                                       |

Reviewer 2: Should we add a comment, that record is byte-packed with no implicit compiler padding?

Author: Added:
> The record layout is byte-packed exactly as shown, with no implicit compiler padding between fields.

> | attrs-data-size |            | uint16                             | Size of `attrs-data`. This lets the reader know when it has consumed all `attrs-data` records within the TLS buffer.                                       |

Reviewer 2: Later we write `[..] We recommend keeping at or under 640 bytes for the total record.`. Should we mention this here as well, otherwise a writer could just write `65535` here.

Author: Agreed! Added:
>  The total record is recommended to stay at or under 640 bytes.

> | attrs-data      |            | uint8[]                            | A byte buffer containing the attributes themselves. Its total length is given by `attrs-data-size`.                                                      |

Reviewer 2: Do we want to have (`key`+`length`+`val`) to be aligned? And if so, should there be some padding?

Reviewer: Would alignment be useful here? My thinking is that in general the reader will want to read the whole structure in one go, so alignment wouldn't make a big difference to the performance-sensitive part; and for the writer, it doesn't seem like it'd make a big difference either?

(E.g. maybe this is a really long-winded way of asking "I'm curious what would be the advantage of alignment for these fields")

Author: I think we should err on the side of preserving bytes here - similar intuition to @ivoanjo that we'd likely read the whole thing in a single stride if possible anyway.

I've added this to the field description to clarify as this has come up a couple times - lmk what you all think! 

>  Entries in `attrs-data` are packed consecutively with no padding between entries;

> | attrs-data      |            | uint8[]                            | A byte buffer containing the attributes themselves. Its total length is given by `attrs-data-size`.                                                      |

Reviewer 2: Should we add some guidance for safety? e.g. if parsing `attrs-data` runs past `attrs-data-size` before finding a full entry (e.g. a length field that would extend beyond the buffer), readers have no guidance. Maybe something like `readers MUST stop parsing if the remaining buffer cannot hold a complete entry.`

Author: Added 
>  Readers MUST stop parsing `attrs-data` if the remaining buffer cannot hold a complete entry.

|                 | [x].key    | uint8 (*See below for alternative) | Index into the key table                                                                                                                                 |
|                 | [x].length | uint8 (*See below for alternative) | Length of val string                                                                                                                                     |
|                 | [x].val    | uint8[length] (utf-8 bytes)        | Inline array of the string value itself. Exactly 'length' bytes appear here, before the next record begins.                                              |

The record MUST start at an address aligned to at least a 2-byte boundary.

This format usually relies on two reads - one to read the required fields up to and including `attrs-data-size` (first 28 bytes), and a second to read any custom attributes.

**Why this layout**: It is scalable; if a writer is configured to publish only the required attributes and no custom fields, it can set `attrs-data-size` to 0; having read the first portion of the structure, the reader stops without having to read the rest.

> **Cache Impact:** Likewise, a frugal writer may aim to keep the entire record under 64 bytes (the typical size of a cache line) in which case we might expect the entire record is in cache after the first read.  This format takes 28 bytes for the lead in, then an overhead of 2 bytes per key-value pair.  For a single pair, we'd have 28 bytes for the value; for two, 26 bytes total. If we expected to track attributes such as `path` and `method`, this means we'd realistically expect to fit in a single cache line of 64 bytes. We recommend keeping at or under 640 bytes for the total record [to match the limit](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/tree/main/design-docs/00002-custom-labels#proposed-solution) on the OTel eBPF Profiler.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Cache Impact:** Likewise, a frugal writer may aim to keep the entire record under 64 bytes (the typical size of a cache line) in which case we might expect the entire record to be in cache after the first read.  This format takes 28 bytes for the lead in, then an overhead of 2 bytes per key-value pair.  For a single pair, we'd have 28 bytes for the value; for two, 26 bytes total. If we expected to track attributes such as `path` and `method`, this means we'd realistically expect to fit in a single cache line of 64 bytes. We recommend keeping at or under 640 bytes for the total record [to match the limit](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/tree/main/design-docs/00002-custom-labels#proposed-solution) on the OTel eBPF Profiler.
```

> **Cache Impact:** Likewise, a frugal writer may aim to keep the entire record under 64 bytes (the typical size of a cache line) in which case we might expect the entire record is in cache after the first read.  This format takes 28 bytes for the lead in, then an overhead of 2 bytes per key-value pair.  For a single pair, we'd have 28 bytes for the value; for two, 26 bytes total. If we expected to track attributes such as `path` and `method`, this means we'd realistically expect to fit in a single cache line of 64 bytes. We recommend keeping at or under 640 bytes for the total record [to match the limit](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/tree/main/design-docs/00002-custom-labels#proposed-solution) on the OTel eBPF Profiler.

Reviewer 2: `For a single pair, we'd have 28 bytes for the value; for two, 26 bytes total.`
This sounds unexpected to me. Could we rephrase it to make it clear how we get to 28 bytes for a single value but 26 bytes for two values?

Reviewer: Fixed in f4ec422a4c62194adcbd982d841fb19258ccf1f0 ! This comment had fallen under the radar and I found it today. Github is really falling apart :(

Readers conforming to this specification MUST only read thread context while the target thread is stopped or interrupted (e.g. via eBPF perf events, ptrace-stop, or equivalent mechanisms).

### Reading Protocol

External readers (such as the OpenTelemetry eBPF profiler) discover and read thread-local context as follows. The reading protocol assumes the reader observes each thread while it is stopped or interrupted.

#### 1. Process Initialization

The external reader discovers a new process to observe. It:

1.1 **Locates the process context**

* The reading protocol from OTEP-4719 is followed to obtain the **Thread-Local Reference Data** resources from the **Process Context**
* The reader may choose to retain the information read from the process mappings at this point, as they are immediately needed for TLS resolution

1.2. **Check binary and loaded libraries for TLS dynsym**

* Generate a list of dynamic libraries loaded by the process from the process mappings in `/proc/<pid>/maps`
* For each of the process itself and its dynamically loaded libraries:
  * Check if the `dynsym` table contains the TLS symbols listed above
  * If it does, collect them

> * Note down the TL offset for **Thread-Local Reference Data** discovered

Reviewer 2: missing `S`:
```suggestion
* Note down the TLS offset for **Thread-Local Reference Data** discovered
```

* Memory overhead of TLS context reads is reduced, minimizing the time a thread must be kept suspended, and reducing the impact on the CPU cache

### Trace Sampling

An out of process reader has no ability to influence the sampling decisions of the in-process tracer; samples collected may therefore reference trace data that was not exported by the SDK, and cannot be used to enrich the sample with request metadata such as `route`. This limits the use of any samples captured under these conditions.

**Mitigation:** by allowing the optional addition of custom key-value pairs to the **Thread-Local Context Record,** an SDK can be configured to ensure core attribute information is shared with the external reader directly. This could be used for instance to attach `route` to each sample.

## What does this mean in practice for runtimes supported by OTel SDKs?

As mentioned above in the document, this mechanism is intended to be optional as not all runtimes and runtime versions are able to feasibly/efficiently implement it.

So far, we've looked at a number of runtimes/languages and we list below what we've learned of their feasibility.

> This section is not intended to constrain implementers of the specification (nor to mandate that SDKs adopt this feature if they have no interest on it), but rather to indicate how likely we currently believe this is to fit with those languages/runtimes:

Reviewer 2: nit: I think this is a typo. as a non-native speaker I might be wrong
```suggestion
This section is not intended to constrain implementers of the specification (nor to mandate that SDKs adopt this feature if they have no interest in it), but rather to indicate how likely we currently believe this is to fit with those languages/runtimes:
```

Reviewer 9: as a native English speaker I agree with Florian

* **Avoiding duplication** - other out-of-process readers such as [OTel OBI](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/zero-code/obi/) could avoid redundant instrumentation efforts in cases where the OTel SDK is already sharing necessary thread context information, simplifying the user experience and conserving resources.

## Explanation

We propose a mechanism for OpenTelemetry SDKs to publish thread-level information reflecting the context of the active request, if any, through a standard format based on the Linux-specific ELF Thread Local Storage (TLS) TLSDESC dialect.

Because this mechanism relies on having a native component and knowing when a runtime switches contexts, we consider it optional for SDKs to support, as some runtimes (or even runtime versions) may not be able to feasibly/efficiently implement it.

> The TLSDESC-based publication mechanism and the in-memory **Thread Local Context Record** format are intentionally separable. Runtimes that cannot efficiently expose context through TLSDESC are not required to implement this mechanism. However, we highly recommend reusing the same in-memory record format when publishing equivalent context through a runtime-specific discovery mechanism, rather than defining a runtime-specific payload format. Such mechanisms are out of scope for this OTEP, but reusing the record layout where practical allows readers to share parsing logic across runtimes.

Reviewer 9: nit: "thread local" (no hyphen) and "thread-local" (with hyphen) both appear several times throughout the document.

> The TLSDESC-based publication mechanism and the in-memory **Thread Local Context Record** format are intentionally separable. Runtimes that cannot efficiently expose context through TLSDESC are not required to implement this mechanism. However, we highly recommend reusing the same in-memory record format when publishing equivalent context through a runtime-specific discovery mechanism, rather than defining a runtime-specific payload format. Such mechanisms are out of scope for this OTEP, but reusing the record layout where practical allows readers to share parsing logic across runtimes.

Reviewer 9: Runtimes that cannot efficiently expose context, _or_ runtimes for whom thread-local context is not relevant (e.g. in Go, Goroutine-local context is more interesting, and in Node, we want something that follows async execution, etc.)

Author: This is a great point; there it's more about the unit of execution context being fundamentally different. Let me think about how to word this

Reviewer: Both go and node do end up mapping their own high-level things onto OS threads, so there is a world where they could use this thread-local context as well.

Thus at least for me the distinction is about what we can be implemented efficiently as a library -- it doesn't matter that "theoretically" someone could change go/node directly to update the thread-local context when they swap async execution scopes or goroutines, because we need a solution that works today.

This to say, in terms of wording, I think that's what's interesting to get across?

Reviewer: We've extended the go and node sections in b3267956d566449899c3b72c6b2dc214b8121dda a few weeks ago so I'm going to assume no news is good news on this one and mark it as resolved. Let me know if you think we're still missing more!

Reviewer: <img width="742" height="72" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0ebd9d0d-6627-44aa-8225-75b2872ec2fe" />

Oh github...

When a request context is attached or detached from a thread, the SDK publishes select information including trace ID, span ID in the format described in this document to the appropriate thread local. When an external reader observes this thread it checks to see if any such TLS data has been attached, and if so, includes it in its telemetry.

### Interaction with other context sources

A valid thread-local context record represents the publishing SDK's view of the active OpenTelemetry context for the observed thread. Readers SHOULD treat this context as authoritative for the OpenTelemetry context fields it provides.

Other context sources, such as OBI-derived information, may still be used to enrich observations or as a fallback when SDK-published thread context is unavailable. If a reader chooses to override or merge conflicting SDK-published context with another source, it SHOULD document that policy explicitly.

### Goals

This mechanism is designed to achieve the following goals:

> * **Reader flexibility**: Readers are not limited to eBPF-based implementations; any external process with sufficient system permissions to read `/proc/<pid>/maps` to identify loaded libraries, as well as sufficient permission to read from process memory should be able to use this mechanism  (nb: [OTEP-4719](4719-process-ctx.md) also requires access to this resource)

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
* **Reader flexibility**: Readers are not limited to eBPF-based implementations; any external process with sufficient system permissions to read `/proc/<pid>/maps` to identify loaded libraries and read from target process memory should be able to use this mechanism  (nb: [OTEP-4719](4719-process-ctx.md) also requires access to this resource)
```

Author: Agreed this is a bit wordy, althoughto me the suggestion makes it sound like `/prod/<pid>/maps` is also the mechanism to 'read from target process memory'.  I'll try think of something else

Author: Reworded inline. lmk what you think!

* **Runtime compatibility:** This mechanism is an optional extension to an OpenTelemetry SDK for languages that are able to use TLSDESC and have an appropriate threading model. We have tested it with C/C++, Rust, and Java, and intend this to work with other runtimes as well, see "What does this mean in practice for runtimes supported by OTel SDKs?" section below.
* **Low, opt-in overhead**: Context attach/detach is a performance critical path in an OpenTelemetry SDK, and this mechanism is designed to provide fixed, low overhead when serializing thread context
* **Simplicity:** Limit the implementation complexity on both writer and reader sides.

## Internal details

### Process Context: Thread Local Reference Data

> This is immutable, process-wide data that the TLS data will reference. It will be stored in the [Process Context introduced by OTEP 4719](4719-process-ctx.md) as entries in the `ProcessContext.attributes` field, which will be set once at process startup and are subsequently considered immutable.

Reviewer 8: Should we reword a little here to be more imperative? e.g.

```suggestion
This is immutable, process-wide data that the TLS data references. It is stored in the [Process Context introduced by OTEP 4719](4719-process-ctx.md) as entries in the `ProcessContext.attributes` field, which is set once at process startup and subsequently considered immutable.
```

Also, do we want to make the claim that "is set once at process startup and subsequently considered immutable" ? The process context doesn't require this, and a process context can be -newly- published at arbitrary points after process startup. It seems to me that we don't care about the "process startup part" for thread context either, but we do care about:

- Subsequent immutability
- Clarify whether reference data MUST be set at initial process context publish time or later (ideally former as it's a lot simpler also for the profiler but maybe we do want that extra flexibility).

Author: Hey @christos68k I think you've hit on an interesting one here! Picking up from the [discussion in the prof sig](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19UqPPPlGE83N37MhS93uRlxsP1_wGxQ33Qv6CDHaEp0/edit?tab=t.0) last week, I _think_ what we really want to do is relax this so that:

* We don't explicitly ask for immutability
* ... so that we can allow the _appending_ of additional keys to the process context record throughout the processes lifecycle

This gives writers the flexibility to allow the user to add keys at runtime dynamically (up to our ceiling) without making life on the reader side too onerous - if a reader encounters a key for an ID it doesn't have, it can simply set the record aside until the next time the process context is read, parsing the rest of the record it _can_ interpret if it sees fit. And we've already got the mechanisms in the procCtx to let readers know they need to re-read.

> Clarify whether reference data MUST be set at initial process context publish time or later (ideally former as it's a lot simpler also for the profiler but maybe we do want that extra flexibility).

I think we should try and favour flexibility here because I don't think we (certainly I don't) have a complete mental model of how bolting the configuration together in different OTel (and hopefully other!) SDKs is going to look like from an API perspective and the lifecycle implications of that. But here I defer entirely to the expertise of the folks working on the profiler such as yourself on what makes sense and where that tradeoff might lie. 

lmk what you think!

Reviewer: I'd go for allowing the reference data to not be set at initial publish time and show up later. My thinking behind this is that libraries might want to delay the thread configuration until some user configuration is read (e.g. to configure user-provided keys), and this leaves a bit of flexibility on the writer without IMO impacting the reader a lot -- the reader already kinda needs to keep an eye out for updates anyway.

The following values are stored:

> * `threadlocal.schema_version` - type and version of the schema - initially `tlsdesc_v1_dev` for experimentation (to be changed to `tlsdesc_v1` once the OTEP gets merged)

Reviewer 2: Should there be a dedicated namespace in SemConv for `threadlocal`, where `schema_version` is a known attribute with a known value? This question applies also to `threadlocal.attribute_key_map`.

Author: [We had a chat about this on an earlier, now barely discoverable thread](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/pull/4947#discussion_r3100465935) and in the SemConv SIG - the conclusion was that since these are an implementation detail between two OTel components and will never appear in something like OTLP, a semconv entry didn't seem necessary. Happy to revisit if you think there's still value in claiming the namespace though!

Reviewer: (Maybe we should capture this "for now we're not keeping this as a separate semantic convention for reason X or Y" somewhere in the document as it sounds like it's a question that might come up a few more times/even later after we merge)

Author: Have added some words to this effect:

> **Note:** The `threadlocal.*` keys are defined here rather than as semantic conventions because they are inter-process coordination metadata, not telemetry attributes, and are not expected to appear in OTLP exports.

>   * Note: Beyond evolution of the format, having the type of the schema allows the application to e.g. signal that it's a go application and thus context should be read from [go pprof labels and not the thread-local](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/tree/main/design-docs/00002-custom-labels) or from a different offset for [Node.js](https://www.polarsignals.com/blog/posts/2025/11/19/custom-labels-for-node-js). (Such alternative schemas would be subject of separate documents)

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
  * Note: Beyond evolution of the format, having the type of the schema allows the application to e.g. signal that it's a Go application and thus context should be read from [Go pprof labels and not the thread-local](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/tree/main/design-docs/00002-custom-labels) or from a different offset for [Node.js](https://www.polarsignals.com/blog/posts/2025/11/19/custom-labels-for-node-js). (Such alternative schemas would be subject of separate documents)
```

      - string_value: "user_id"      # index 2
```

**Why:** this mechanism separates static, process-scoped data from the TLS storage, so that a reader can read it once and not every time it samples a thread.
This reduces the cost of both writing and reading thread samples, while retaining flexibility to store an arbitrary set of extra attributes on samples as required.
By leveraging OTEP 4719 we are also collocating with another feature that is likely to be used by many of the same readers.

### Thread Local Variable Resolution

This OTEP uses "TLSDESC dialect" to refer to the ELF TLS strategy used by compilers and linkers when requested, for example with `-mtls-dialect=gnu2` in GCC or Clang.

This does not require the compiler and linker to emit the specific TLSDESC access model in all build/linkage configurations. Even when the TLSDESC dialect is enabled, linkers may relax TLS references to traditional models such as local-exec or initial-exec when the variable is known locally or at load time.

For this OTEP, `otel_thread_ctx_v1` must be an exported ELF TLS symbol, typically provided by a shared library built with the TLSDESC dialect.

### Thread Local Variable

> We introduce a single thread local - `otel_thread_ctx_v1`. This is a pointer to the active **Thread Local Context Record** associated with the given thread.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
We introduce a single thread local - `otel_thread_ctx_v1`. This is a pointer to the active **Thread Local Context Record** associated with the given thread, or `NULL` if there is no active record.
```

### Thread Local Context Record

> This is the attached thread record itself. SDK-side implementations may choose to hold multiple instances of this for active spans, and attach/detach them by setting the TLS to point to the appropriate entry. We err on the side of simplicity and support stringy (utf-8 bytes) attributes only.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This is the attached thread record itself. SDK-side implementations may choose to hold multiple instances of this for active spans, and attach/detach them by setting the TLS to point to the appropriate entry. We err on the side of simplicity and support string (length prefixed utf-8 bytes) attributes only.
```

Author: I think `stringy` is definitely too informal here, and the addition of utf-8 bytes makes sense to me. The 'length prefixed' feels a bit overspecified for this bit in the doc, though - it feels like it implies something _more_ than what we have in the field layout section below. Reworded inline - wdyt @christos68k ?

Reviewer: I think either one works... And I have a small suggestion -- perhaps we could include a "hexdump" of a tiny example to clarify how it looks in practice?

We didn't do this for process context since that's mostly protobuf, but folks bootstrapping their own readers could use as a first test to check their parsing.

> | Name            |            | Data type                          | Notes                                                                                                                                                    |

Author: @florianl @christos68k @felixge @ivoanjo @brancz - as discussed in the prof sig yesterday, here is where we could consider adding add-hoc (i.e. not pre-configured in process context) labels. 

Our discussion yesterday, I believe, came to the conclusion we _probably shouldnt_ do this for now because:

* we want to discourage high cardinality keys / churn
* we don't expect that this is likely to serve a common use case
* we want to err on the side of keeping the spec simple and opinionated
* we can always add this later if we see demand

... but let's use this thread for more complete discussion as we need!

Reviewer: For context, relevant meeting notes are [on the May 28th, 2026](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19UqPPPlGE83N37MhS93uRlxsP1_wGxQ33Qv6CDHaEp0/edit?tab=t.0#bookmark=id.1qinp9xzqmsl) meeting.

+1 I agree with err'ing on the side of simplicity for now, for the reasons Scott stated, especially as I can see no blockers with this being added in the future as an extension if needed.

> | :-------------- | :--------- | :--------------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

Reviewer 9: We should state explicitly that this is aligned on 2-byte boundaries (if indeed that's true). I assume it's true because otherwise, `attrs-data-size` will be an unaligned read and it makes no sense to have the `_reserved` byte.

Author: yep; 2 byte alignment and padding to achieve that. Updating.

| trace-id        |            | uint8[16]                          | In W3C Trace Context format. Zeroes can be used to indicate none active. If either of trace-id/span-id are set, both must be set.                        |
| span-id         |            | uint8[8]                           | In W3C Trace Context format.                                                                                                                             |

> | valid           |            | uint8                              | This value is set to 1 when the record is valid. Consumers should ignore this record if any other value is set  when they read.                          |

Reviewer 9: Thinking about this more, I'm not convinced `valid` is needed.

If we didn't have the `valid` field, then when modifying a record in-place, we could simply detach it first, e.g.:

```c
ThreadContextRecord *r = otel_thread_ctx_v1;
otel_thread_ctx_v1 = NULL;
BARRIER;
// do some mutations on r...
BARRIER;
otel_thread_ctx_v1 = r;
```

AFAICT, this would not be any slower or worse than the current approach of mutating `valid`, but I might be missing something.

Author: Lifting @ivoanjo 's words out of a slack chat:

>What you're saying is correct -- the thinking about having this bit of extra flexibility is that if you're exposing the thread context from C/C++/Rust to another language, if there's a valid field in there you can "just" expose a byte-buffer and allow the high-level language to directly update the context without needing to also somehow teach it how to update the TLS (and expose something like "a raw pointer"). Thus it's a bit of extra redundancy for a bit of extra implementation flexibility for writers -- at least that's how I'd describe it

While we've been PoCing this internally, we found it to be useful for Java in particular where the cost of twiddling the TLS pointer itself is relatively high.

Reviewer: Yeah, this :D

We actually already have some text about this later on in the doc:

> A SDK should choose to either set/unset the TLS pointer itself, or the `valid` flag, but not both.
>
> The intention of this design is to enable flexibility for the writers. We envision that some writers may choose to keep a fixed record for a given thread and can thus mutate it in-place, and that other writers may instead keep the record associated with some other high-level concept (coroutine, request, etc) and swap out the pointer as needed when they become active on any given thread.

Reviewer 9: We discussed this a bit more in Slack, but it's probably better to take the discussion to a public place. I am still not fully convinced, for two main reasons:

1. First, why is it expensive in Java? Even if the FFI required to access TLS variables in Java is high, it seems to me you could save a pointer to the TLS variable in each Java thread, and access the variable through that pointer, rather than redoing the TLS lookup every time. I don't know Java beyond the basics, so please let me know if I'm making any erroneous assumptions.
2. Even if it is in fact true that the `valid` flag makes it possible for the Java implementation to be slightly faster, this has other efficiency drawbacks. We have to check the `valid` flag on _every_ trip through the unwinder (that's only one branch but it's not nothing), whereas any disadvantage on the writing side is only incurred when the label set is actually changed. Furthermore, having this flag makes the struct 2 bytes longer and the ABI more complicated.

I could be convinced that this flag is useful, but I'd be interested in seeing a more concrete example of how it's used from Java and what it would look like from Java if we didn't have the `valid` flag and only could set/unset the TLS variable to NULL.

Reviewer: Those are good points, let me try to address them ;)

> 1. First, why is it expensive in Java? Even if the FFI required to access TLS variables in Java is high, it seems to me you could save a pointer to the TLS variable in each Java thread, and access the variable through that pointer, rather than redoing the TLS lookup every time. I don't know Java beyond the basics, so please let me know if I'm making any erroneous assumptions.

Indeed what you're saying it's possible. The way I think about it is:

* You always need to touch the thread-local context record to update it, so if you're exposing it to a high-level language as a byte-buffer ish (e.g. Java, Ruby), you're always going to need to expose that memory location. Exposing a byte-buffer to the high-level language is useful because the JIT can then kick in and make updating the context something you can do in a very optimized way, without needing to jump over the FFI. (In the JVM in specific, calling across the FFI is more expensive than regular Java methods, and these calls cannot be optimized by the JIT)
* Thinking about CPU caches and whatnot, with `valid` sitting in the middle of the record, it would be pulled into the CPU cache already.
* The context record structure itself has only data and no pointers. So a high-level bit of code that's limited to writing in a sized byte-buffer can't do much damage if there's any bugs.

Removing the `valid` and forcing the thread-local storage to always be written would mean:

* Two pointers need to be exposed to the high-level code: the TLS and the context record. (Or at least, there would need to be an FFI call to "set TLS to null" && "set it back to the context")
* The TLS pointer is almost for sure in a different memory location from the context, so that's an extra cache miss
* Having the high-level code be able to update a pointer sounds like it might be a bit more error-prone. E.g. what if it sets the pointer to something else that's not a context record?

As part of validating this work, we've implemented the current thread context sharing proposal in Datadog's Java Profiler (used by dd-trace-java, Datadog's Java SDK) in https://github.com/DataDog/java-profiler/pull/347 and it takes advantage of the things I mentioned above:

1. It initializes the TLS when a new thread gets created and never touches it again
2. It exposes the thread-local context record to the high-level Java code, and thus you never need to cross the FFI back to C++ code to update the context

In our internal benchmarks, this approach was even cheaper than the one we had before (there's a markdown file in that PR with our results), which was really great news, since I think we want as many OTel and other SDKs to adopt this feature, on by default, and being able to say "look the cost is ultra-low, you don't need to worry about this impacting performance".

(To be clear, my claim is not that we couldn't have done this without `valid`, only that it worked out quite well there -- and you can see the history of all our discussions and that we tried several designs and went quite a lot back-and-forth on that PR)

> 2. Even if it is in fact true that the valid flag makes it possible for the Java implementation to be slightly faster, this has other efficiency drawbacks. We have to check the valid flag on every trip through the unwinder (that's only one branch but it's not nothing), whereas any disadvantage on the writing side is only incurred when the label set is actually changed. Furthermore, having this flag makes the struct 2 bytes longer and the ABI more complicated.

I won't claim this does not add a bit more work on the reader side -- so that's definitely a trade-off for the gains I mention above.

Yet, I think there's an important flip-side to -- "We have to check the valid flag on every trip through the unwinder (that's only one branch but it's not nothing), whereas any disadvantage on the writing side is only incurred when the label set is actually changed.": the writer **must always incur the cost of setting**, otherwise, data will be missing/incomplete. If spans are installed for 100ms or even more at a time, that's not a lot of writes. But on a high-throughput system with requests in the single-ms range, it's possible there'll be even more writes than reads. And while the reader can always decide to self-throttle by tweaking the sampling rate, the writer doesn't have a good mechanism for this.

Reviewer: I hope no news is good news here? I'm going to mark this one as resolved, let me know if you're not convinced by my small treaty above and this needs to be revisited ;)

| _reserved       |            | uint8                              | One spare byte here to align attrs-data-size at two byte boundary.                                                                                       |
| attrs-data-size |            | uint16                             | Size of `attrs-data`. This lets the reader know when it has consumed all `attrs-data` records within the TLS buffer.                                       |
| attrs-data      |            | uint8[]                            | A byte buffer containing the attributes themselves. Its total length is given by `attrs-data-size`.                                                      |
|                 | [x].key    | uint8 (*See below for alternative) | Index into the key table                                                                                                                                 |
|                 | [x].length | uint8 (*See below for alternative) | Length of val string                                                                                                                                     |

> |                 | [x].val    | uint8[length] (utf-8 bytes)        | Inline array of the string value itself. Exactly 'length' bytes appear here, before the next record begins.                                              |

Reviewer 9: > before the next record begins

...unless we are assuming a 2-byte alignment, in which case there will be an extra padding byte if the entire record has an odd length.

Reviewer: I was discussing this with Scott and I realized I wasn't quite sure I fully understood this suggestion.

Are you suggesting:

1. That the overall "Thread-Local Context Record" should have a total size that is aligned (so that e.g. people don't create one that is "exactly 613 bytes")?
2. That inside `attrs-data` the key/length/bytes entries should be aligned?
3. (Something else?)

Reviewer 7: Maybe there's confusion around

> before the next record begins.

We're actually talking about the next _attribute_ in `attrs-data` here, right? And not the next `ThreadContextRecord` (which needs not exist, needs not be placed after this one, and is _not_ 1-byte aligned indeed). On the other hand, everything in `attrs-data` are individual bytes or byte arrays, so there's no reason for padding or alignment here.

If so, maybe substituting "record" for "attribute" or at least "attribute record" could dispel the confusion?

Author: I think that's a good idea to disambiguate. Have added:
>    Inline array of the string value itself. Exactly `length` bytes appear here, before the next **attribute** entry begins.

This format usually relies on two reads - one to read the required fields up to and including `attrs-data-size` (first 28 bytes), and a second to read any custom attributes.

**Why this layout**: It is scalable; if a writer is configured to publish only the required attributes and no custom fields, it can set `attrs-data-size` to 0; having read the first portion of the structure, the reader stops without having to read the rest.

**Cache Impact:** Likewise, a frugal writer may aim to keep the entire record under 64 bytes (the typical size of a cache line) in which case we might expect the entire record is in cache after the first read.  This format takes 28 bytes for the lead in, then an overhead of 2 bytes per key-value pair.  For a single pair, we'd have 28 bytes for the value; for two, 26 bytes total. If we expected to track attributes such as `path` and `method`, this means we'd realistically expect to fit in a single cache line of 64 bytes. We recommend keeping at or under 640 bytes for the total record [to match the limit](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/tree/main/design-docs/00002-custom-labels#proposed-solution) on the OTel eBPF Profiler.

> ***Possible alternative/request for comments:** Switch one or both of `[x].key` and `[x].length` to being a [protobuf-style variable-length integer](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/encoding/#varints). This would allow more than 255 keys or longer value lengths than 255 bytes, if needed. Do we want this?*

Reviewer 9: We discussed this a few months ago in a meeting, I think the conclusion was just go with the u8 limit for now, and introduce a "v2" format with VLIs if we ever have demand for it, which seems unlikely.

Reviewer 7: Should this sentence be removed from the final version?

### Publication Protocol

The publishing SDK makes thread local context available to external readers through the following sequence:

#### 1. Process Initialization

At process startup, the SDK:

* Publishes the **Thread Local Reference Data** to the **Process Context** (per OTEP-4719):
  * `threadlocal.schema_version`: version of the schema for compatibility checking
  * `threadlocal.attribute_key_map`: mapping from key indexes (uint8) to attribute names
* The SDK takes note of the `attribute_key_map` as this is used to prepare the TLS data itself.

#### 2. Context Attachment

When a request context is attached to a thread, the SDK:

> 1. Sets the TLS pointer to 0 to ensure readers see no record during construction

Reviewer 9: Why is this initial setting to 0 necessary; can't we just set the pointer to the new record once it's done being constructed? Then the reader will see either the old record or the new record, never "no record" (at least in this code path; the mutate-in-place path is different).

Author: I reckon the tradeoff here is whether we want to prefer "some record" over "no record". Said otherwise, at the point we are trying to set a new record, the old record is no longer valid for the thread and we should clear it quickly. Maybe something like:

```suggestion
1. Sets the TLS pointer to 0 to dettach the old record from the thread
```

wdyt @umanwizard ?

Reviewer: We could restrict this a bit; yet I think allowing "no record" does make things easier on the writer. It allows a new webserver request to start by setting a record and to end by clearing it (before a thread goes back to the idle thread pool or similar).

Requiring always an active record would disallow an implementation of this kind. So I'd classify the "be able to go back to no record" as a nice to have, although yes we could make do without it.

Reviewer 9: I agree that we should not always require an active record. I guess my point is that either approach will work, and which one should be preferred probably depends on the application, so I don't think the OTEP needs to be prescriptive about it.

Reviewer: Ah, yeah, good point -- indeed the text can suggest detaching for in-place updates OR swapping if an "update" is done by creating an entire new record to replace the previous point.

In general I agree without that the spec should not be overly prescriptive and should try to leave space for implementations to do what makes sense for them.

Author: Ok so i've dropped the "Sets the TLS pointer to zero ..." bit, and added a comment below:

> If reusing storage that may already be visible to readers, the SDK MAY first set the TLS pointer to `NULL` to ensure readers see no record during construction.

1. Sets the `valid` flag to `false`
2. Updates the **Thread Local Context Record** for the thread as required
3. Sets the `valid` field to `true` to indicate the record is complete

A SDK should choose to either set/unset the TLS pointer itself, or the `valid` flag, but not both.
The intention of this design is to enable flexibility for the writers. We envision that some writers may choose to keep a fixed record for a given thread and can thus mutate it in-place, and that other writers may instead keep the record associated with some other high-level concept (coroutine, request, etc) and swap out the pointer as needed when they become active on any given thread.

In both cases, all pointer and validity updates use compiler fences (`atomic_signal_fence` or equivalent) and volatile writes to prevent instruction reordering by the compiler. This design assumes signal handler-like semantics, therefore it is unnecessary to guard against CPU reordering.

#### 3. Context Detachment

When a request context is no longer active on a thread, the SDK:

1. Sets the TLS pointer to `NULL`

> For SDKs using the fixed-record mode, detachment instead sets the `valid` flag to `false`.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
When a request context is no longer active on a thread, the SDK either sets the TLS pointer to `NULL`, or sets the `valid` flag to `false`.
```

I don't think we need to be prescriptive about assigning SDKs into different "modes", etc.; just point out that either of these is a correct way to indicate "no active record".

#### Design Considerations

> **Consistency during updates**: By setting the TLS pointer to `NULL` before constructing a new record, the SDK ensures readers never observe partially-written data. Readers that sample a thread during this window simply see no active context.

Reviewer 8: Isn't this explanation redundant due to the `valid` field (which is set/unset in both cases) allowing for easy record invalidation?

Essentially, partially-written data is not a problem as it can be unambiguously detected and discarded.

Reviewer 9: In fact, _neither_ setting anything to `NULL` _nor_ setting `valid = 0` is necessary to prevent torn reads in the case where you are constructing a record out-of-place and then installing it. You just need to make sure (via compiler fences) that the record is done being constructed before you overwrite the TLS pointer with the new address. The only time you need to do anything special to prevent torn reads is if you're modifying the record in place.

Author: ACK - I don't think we need this at all - the `Context Attachment` section above covers this more accurately - and its a bit confused. I'll remove it!

**Record reuse**: SDKs may implement caching strategies where records for frequently-reattached contexts (e.g., a parent span that is repeatedly entered and exited) are retained rather than reconstructed. The `valid` field can alternatively be used to mark a record as under modification without detaching it entirely.

**Allocation:** Implementations may choose to preallocate storage for some fixed set of **Thread Local Reference Data** instances. This removes the need to allocate in the hot path.

**Concurrency model**: Unlike the process context (OTEP 4719), where the writer races asynchronously with the reader and CPU memory barriers (`atomic_thread_fence` with `seq_cst`) are required, thread context assumes signal handler-like semantics.

> In practice, context reads are expected to behave as if the thread whose context is being read is stopped or otherwise interrupted, and thus there can't be any concurrency hazards between reads and writes.

Reviewer 8: Clarifying:

```suggestion
In practice, context reads are expected to behave as if the thread whose context is being read is stopped or otherwise interrupted, and thus there can't be any concurrency hazards between reads and writes (as the writer logic will always execute as part of the thread).
```

Author: Good point! I've rejigged it slightly more as i'm not happy with how we wrote it originally either - will push change shortly - lmk what you think

## Prior art and alternatives

There are two existing TLS mechanisms we are aware of for sharing similar information that we took inspiration from. In both cases the same mechanism is used for TLS discovery and access as described here, the differences are only in the storage format:

[**Elastic Universal Profiling Integration**](https://github.com/elastic/apm/blob/149cd3e39a77a58002344270ed2ad35357bdd02d/specs/agents/universal-profiling-integration.md#process-storage-layout)**:** Uses a simple, flat memory, fixed-length layout behind a single TLS capturing core trace information (parent, flags, ID, span ID, transaction ID) only. This is simple to implement and fast to read and write.

[**Polar Signals Custom Labels**](https://github.com/polarsignals/custom-labels/blob/master/custom-labels-v1.md#custom_labels_current_set)**:** An alternative to the elastic model, additionally supporting custom key-value pairs.

> This proposal attempts to unify the benefits of these two approaches by providing the flexibility of the **polar signals** format with the static allocation and read time performance of the **elastic** format.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
This proposal attempts to unify the benefits of these two approaches by providing the flexibility of the **Polar Signals** format with the static allocation and read time performance of the **Elastic** format.
```

The following values are stored:

* `threadlocal.schema_version` - type and version of the schema - initially `tlsdesc_v1_dev` for experimentation (to be changed to `tlsdesc_v1` once the OTEP gets merged)
  * Note: Beyond evolution of the format, having the type of the schema allows the application to e.g. signal that it's a Go application and thus context should be read from [Go pprof labels and not the thread-local](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/tree/main/design-docs/00002-custom-labels) or from a different offset for [Node.js](https://www.polarsignals.com/blog/posts/2025/11/19/custom-labels-for-node-js). (Such alternative schemas would be subject of separate documents)
* `threadlocal.attribute_key_map` - provides a mapping from **key indexes** (uint8 maximum) to **attribute names** (string). The thread-local storage itself will then use these key indexes in place of the **attribute names**.

> **Note:** The `threadlocal.*` keys are defined here rather than as semantic conventions because they are inter-process coordination metadata, not telemetry attributes, and are not expected to appear in OTLP exports.

> The exact format used will be the `repeated KeyValue` protobuf structure from the `ProcessContext.attributes` field standardized in OTEP-4719. A stringified representation of this showing the usage of the elements of that schema along with some example values:

Reviewer 11: Should we be preferring a write-optimised format here?

Protobufs are size-prefixed - so if you go to mutate this dictionary, you may need to rewrite the entire block or otherwise keep the block in memory with various optimisations.  Is that desired?

Reviewer: It's expected to contain only a limited set of keys (those we can index with a single byte), and keys can only be added, and thus the total number of rewrites gets capped.

(In 0661c1dd144d4b1cb93852504eb3304f6eca9e88 we added a lot of details to how the dictionary is to be used, hopefully that clears it up for future readers as well)

Reviewer 11: Thanks - going to make a few clarification comments around this.

```yaml
key: "threadlocal.schema_version"
value:
  string_value: "tlsdesc_v1_dev"

key: "threadlocal.attribute_key_map"
value:
  array_value:
    values:
      - string_value: "http_route"   # index 0
      - string_value: "http_method"  # index 1
      - string_value: "user_id"      # index 2
```

**Why:** this mechanism separates static, process-scoped data from the TLS storage, so that a reader can read it once and not every time it samples a thread.

> This reduces the cost of both writing and reading thread samples, while retaining flexibility to store an arbitrary set of extra attributes on samples as required.

Reviewer 11: My concern here is whether or not we know the dictionary ahead of time - What does that look like in instrumentation?

I realize we may be able to do this in OBI - how does this work generically in an API/SDK component?

Reviewer: The dictionary doesn't need to be known ahead of time (e.g. at process start, or SDK load/start). The "process context" is able to support updates, so an app can start with no dictionary/with a small set of known keys, then add more when configuration shows up, and/or expand as needed on-demand later.

(In 0661c1dd144d4b1cb93852504eb3304f6eca9e88 we added a lot of details to how the dictionary is to be used, hopefully that clears it up for future readers as well)

Reviewer 11: This helps  - I think we need some additional clarification like you added in the meeting -

Particularly the this *entire block* of values is safeguarded from corrupted reads, and we rely on that for safely reading.   We also rely on *single writer* of this data and push to the SDK the responsibility of ensuring consistencny within itself to act as the single writer.

Reviewer: Ack! In eeb67ea787966dbd51f9f4c24e1d9ea024cf2ba9 + 2551fdea1d97d18c08743141a9c382b8e893f52f clarifies the situation with safety and writers/readers, plus what we're relying on OTEP 4719 to guarantee.

The record layout is byte-packed exactly as shown, with no implicit compiler padding between fields.

| Name            |            | Data type                          | Notes                                                                                                                                                    |
| :-------------- | :--------- | :--------------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| trace-id        |            | uint8[16]                          | In W3C Trace Context format. Zeroes can be used to indicate none active. If either of trace-id/span-id are set, both must be set.                        |
| span-id         |            | uint8[8]                           | In W3C Trace Context format.                                                                                                                             |

> | valid           |            | uint8                              | This value is set to 1 when the record is valid. Consumers should ignore this record if any other value is set  when they read.                          |

Reviewer 11: You should also include trace flags here somewhere

Reviewer: Interesting point: This didn't come up so far as none of the readers or similar prior implementations we've seen wanted trace flags.

I'm kinda leaning towards stating it could be included in the (optional) attributes section in the future if readers start wanting this info... :eyes: 

The other alternative would be to take over the `_reserved` byte that we added for alignment after `valid`, since that'd be enough to carry traceflags.

| _reserved       |            | uint8                              | One spare byte here to align attrs-data-size at two byte boundary.                                                                                       |
| attrs-data-size |            | uint16                             | Size of `attrs-data`. This lets the reader know when it has consumed all `attrs-data` records within the TLS buffer. The total record is recommended to stay at or under 640 bytes. |
| attrs-data      |            | uint8[]                            | A byte buffer containing the attributes themselves. Its total length is given by `attrs-data-size`.                                                      |

> |                 | [x].key    | uint8 (*See below for alternative) | Index into the key table. Readers MUST ignore entries whose key index is outside `threadlocal.attribute_key_map`.                                         |

Reviewer 11: IIUC - this means we need to update the overall dictionary from ANY thread.

I have concerns about that - how do we do it safely and notfiy any reader that this memory has changed?  How often does this lead to a cache flush in hot paths?

Reviewer: Updates to the dictionary are updates to the process context, which already defines the mechanism for readers to know when things have changed.

Since keys are defined as append-only, a reader that doesn't care about other details of the process context can even go as far as only re-reading the process context when a new index that it had not seen before shows up. More generically, the process context defines two ways for the reader to detect changes -- polling the `monotonic_published_at_ns` variable OR hooking on prctl to observe changes when they happen.

(In 0661c1dd144d4b1cb93852504eb3304f6eca9e88 we added a lot of details to how the dictionary is to be used, hopefully that clears it up for future readers as well)

### Reading Protocol

External readers (such as the OpenTelemetry eBPF profiler) discover and read thread-local context as follows. The reading protocol assumes the reader observes each thread while it is stopped or interrupted.

#### 1. Process Initialization

The external reader discovers a new process to observe. It:

1.1 **Locates the process context**

* The reading protocol from OTEP-4719 is followed to obtain the **Thread-Local Reference Data** resources from the **Process Context**
* The reader may choose to retain the information read from the process mappings at this point, as they are immediately needed for TLS resolution

1.2. **Check binary and loaded libraries for TLS dynsym**

* Generate a list of dynamic libraries loaded by the process from the process mappings in `/proc/<pid>/maps`
* For each of the process itself and its dynamically loaded libraries:
  * Check if the `dynsym` table contains the TLS symbols listed above
  * If it does, collect them
* Note down the TLS offset for **Thread-Local Reference Data** discovered

> If the `threadlocal.*` keys are not present in the process context at this point, the reader should defer TLS symbol discovery and re-run step 1.2 when the process context is next updated. Readers can detect process context updates using the polling or prctl-hook mechanisms described in OTEP-4719.

Reviewer 11: This is the bit that makes me the most nervous - Does this mean we need to understand all possible keys *at startup*?  Our APIs are dynamic here for what can go into context - does this come with a mechanism to lock that down?

Reviewer: In 0661c1dd144d4b1cb93852504eb3304f6eca9e88 we added a lot of details to how the dictionary is to be used, hopefully that clears it up for future readers as well.

This one was definitely not clear prior to our change, but the intention is that keys do not have to be known at start-up. They can show up any time later in the process execution, and new keys can be added (up to the defined limits)

* **Runtime compatibility:** This mechanism is an optional extension to an OpenTelemetry SDK for languages that are able to use ELF TLS and have an appropriate threading model. We have tested it with C/C++, Rust, and Java, and intend this to work with other runtimes as well, see "What does this mean in practice for runtimes supported by OTel SDKs?" section below.
* **Low, opt-in overhead**: Context attach/detach is a performance critical path in an OpenTelemetry SDK, and this mechanism is designed to provide fixed, low overhead when serializing thread context
* **Simplicity:** Limit the implementation complexity on both writer and reader sides.

## Internal details

### Process Context: Thread-Local Reference Data

This is process-wide data that the TLS data will reference. It will be stored in the [Process Context introduced by OTEP 4719](4719-process-ctx.md) as entries in the `ProcessContext.attributes` field.

The following values are stored:

> * `threadlocal.schema_version` - type and version of the schema - initially `tlsdesc_v1_dev` for experimentation (to be changed to `tls_v1` once the OTEP gets merged)

Reviewer 2: Should the renaming be `tlsdesc_v1_dev` to `tlsdesc_v1`?
```suggestion
* `threadlocal.schema_version` - type and version of the schema - initially `tlsdesc_v1_dev` for experimentation (to be changed to `tlsdesc_v1` once the OTEP gets merged)
```

Author: @florianl now that we've relaxed the wording to say "_please_ use TLSDESC if you can, but we will reluctantly support global-dynamic old-school GNU dialect on the reader too in case that's too hard for you", we figured we'd rename this too. We _didn't_ rename the pre-release name so that code that's already been written against the draft spec is still good in the meantime.

Reviewer 2: ok - make sense. Thanks for the clarification. I missed this historical context :sweat_smile: please resolve my comment

This reduces the cost of both writing and reading thread samples, while retaining flexibility to store an arbitrary set of extra attributes on samples as required.
By leveraging OTEP 4719 we are also collocating with another feature that is likely to be used by many of the same readers.

#### `attribute_key_map` dictionary semantics

The key map is intended to attach a minimal set of contextual attributes to profiles, so that samples remain useful even when trace data is unavailable. The `attribute_key_map` is append-only: entries are added but never removed or reordered. Existing key indexes remain stable once assigned, so readers can treat previously-seen indexes as valid without re-reading the full map.

Keys do not need to be registered at process startup. New keys may be appended over time as the SDK encounters new attribute names. Updates are expected to be infrequent; in practice, the key set is typically established early in the process lifetime. Prior implementations have shown that a small number of keys is sufficient for the common case.

> When a key is appended, the SDK must update the `attribute_key_map` entry in the Process Context. This spec does not define how threads coordinate on this update; implementors may use a mutex or any mechanism that satisfies the update protocol described in OTEP 4719.

Reviewer 11: We should clarify this -

The previous OTEP outlines how *readers* safely consume the entire block and not see corrupted / in-progress changes.  

I think that - in addition to what you already call out about the update protocol from OTEP 4719 should be enough here.

Reviewer: Ack! In eeb67ea787966dbd51f9f4c24e1d9ea024cf2ba9 + 2551fdea1d97d18c08743141a9c382b8e893f52f clarifies the situation with safety and writers/readers, plus what we're relying on OTEP 4719 to guarantee.

> 

Reviewer 11: We should call out reader behavior, e.g. if the reader encounters a dictionary index they do not see, they MUST refresh their dictionary at that time, and handle this use case.

Author: Added!

The uint8 key index caps the map at 256 entries. This is a conscious trade-off for v1; if it proves limiting, future versions may extend the dictionary or allow inline keys for high-cardinality use cases.

### Thread-Local Variable Resolution

`otel_thread_ctx_v1` must be an exported ELF TLS symbol. The following TLS access models are supported:

- **Global Dynamic / TLSDESC** (recommended): the symbol uses the TLSDESC dialect (e.g. `-mtls-dialect=gnu2` in GCC or Clang), producing TLSDESC relocations in shared libraries. This is the preferred model as it offers the best runtime performance for the writer.
- **Global Dynamic / legacy GNU**: the symbol uses traditional GNU TLS General Dynamic relocations. This is supported but not preferred.
- **Static access (initial-exec or local-exec)**: linkers may relax a Global Dynamic reference to initial-exec or local-exec when the variable's module is known at link time, for example when `otel_thread_ctx_v1` is defined in a main executable. This relaxation is outside the writer's control and readers MUST handle it.

> The Local Dynamic model is not supported.

Reviewer 7: Should we also accept "Local dynamic"? I think the idea behind accepting the legacy global dynamic model was to say: it can be very hard for downstream languages to control the TLS access model, so let's put the support burden on the reader instead. But right now we still forbid legacy local dynamic, which has different relocations and thus address resolution mechanism, which I feel like nullify the effort: publishers theoretically still have to mess with linkers and whatnot to prevent this specific access model to be selected. In fact I even suspect there's no other practical way to prevent local dynamic than to force TLSDESC/gnu2 instead, and local dynamic is not unlikely if you delegate all the context stuff to a native library (e.g. as in libdatadog).

I think we should either revert to forcing TLSDESC, or switching to accepting all possible access models, but I'm not sure of the value of the current in-between: it requires more from the reader while not really helping the publisher.

Reviewer: > But right now we still forbid legacy local dynamic, which has different relocations and thus address resolution mechanism, which I feel like nullify the effort: publishers theoretically still have to mess with linkers and whatnot to prevent this specific access model to be selected.

I won't claim that there's not a few shenanigans sometimes, yet if a symbol is public, then by definition it can't be local dynamic, e.g. isn't that why `-fno-semantic-interposition` exists?

In general, I believe requiring that the symbol be public (and thus you can't fallback to local dynamic) is a desirable property to have here.

Reviewer 7: > I won't claim that there's not a few shenanigans sometimes, yet if a symbol is public, then by definition it can't be local dynamic, e.g. isn't that why -fno-semantic-interposition exists?

Ah, that is a good point. It seems you're right, the linker/compiler wouldn't generate a or relax to LD for a visible symbol. So I guess my original point is moot :+1:

Writers SHOULD use the TLSDESC dialect where practical, as it offers better write-path performance.
Readers MUST support all three models above, see "Reading Protocol" section for details.

### Thread-Local Variable

We introduce a single thread-local - `otel_thread_ctx_v1`. This is a pointer to the active **Thread-Local Context Record** associated with the given thread.

### Thread-Local Context Record

This is the attached thread record itself. SDK-side implementations may choose to hold multiple instances of this for active spans, and attach/detach them by setting the TLS to point to the appropriate entry. We err on the side of simplicity and support string (utf-8 bytes) attributes only.

> The record layout is byte-packed exactly as shown, with no implicit compiler padding between fields.

Reviewer 11: Nit: call out endian-ness (or that it's in native machine endian) just to be explicit (particularly for Java folks)

Author: Added!

| Name            |            | Data type                          | Notes                                                                                                                                                    |
| :-------------- | :--------- | :--------------------------------- | :------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| trace-id        |            | uint8[16]                          | In W3C Trace Context format. Zeroes can be used to indicate none active. If either of trace-id/span-id are set, both must be set.                        |
| span-id         |            | uint8[8]                           | In W3C Trace Context format.                                                                                                                             |

> | valid           |            | uint8                              | This value is set to 1 when the record is valid. Consumers should ignore this record if any other value is set when they read.                           |

Reviewer 11: *blocking comment* - Do we need traceflags propagated here - https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#trace-flags

particularly - Do we need the sampled *and* randomness flags? https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context-2/#trace-flags

cc @jmacd for help understanding the need here.

Author: @ivoanjo and I had a chat about this yesterday and we agree - we figure that as OBI are already interested in this mechanism and it is easy to imagine they'll benefit from having the trace flags, we should include it. We have the spare byte `_reserved` to pad to align anyway, so we've reused that. Spec updated.

Reviewer: Trace flags added in eeb67ea787966dbd51f9f4c24e1d9ea024cf2ba9

  rather than going "everyone has thread locals so this should be fine"

## Open questions

1. Are the current limits on key and value count and length acceptable/the right trade-off?

2. Should there be a way to provide dynamic keys without needing to add them via the `attribute_key_map`?

## Prototypes

* Readers:
  * **[ctx-sharing-demo reader](https://github.com/scottgerring/ctx-sharing-demo/tree/main/context-reader)**: Sample reader, based on PolarSignals' [custom-labels](https://github.com/polarsignals/custom-labels/tree/master) work
  * **[OpenTelemetry eBPF Profiler PR](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/pull/1229)**: Reads thread context information and propagates it with profiles

* Writers:
  * **[ctx-sharing-demo repo](https://github.com/scottgerring/ctx-sharing-demo)**: Multiple writer examples, including in rust and C
  * **[opentelemetry-rust](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-rust/compare/main...scottgerring:opentelemetry-rust:feat/otep-4719)**: Experimental implementation of both process context and thread context for rust SDK

>   * **[Node.js thread context](https://github.com/polarsignals/custom-labels/tree/otel-thread-ctx-wip)**: Experimental implementation of thread context for Node.js

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  * **[Node.js thread context](https://github.com/polarsignals/custom-labels/tree/otel-thread-ctx-wip/js)**: Experimental implementation of thread context for Node.js
```

Reviewer: Applied in 009fafa5e9f252f098697d929cc7faa84dcc5ff7

  * **[libdd-otel-thread-ctx](https://github.com/DataDog/libdatadog/tree/main/libdd-otel-thread-ctx)**: Datadog's open-source implementation of thread context in Rust

>   * **[Datadog's dd-trace-java SDK](https://github.com/DataDog/java-profiler/pull/347)**: Shows an high-performance implementation of thread context, and includes adoption of this mechanism by an in-process profiler, demonstrating applicability beyond eBPF-based readers

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  * **[Datadog's dd-trace-java SDK](https://github.com/DataDog/java-profiler/pull/347)**: Shows a high-performance implementation of thread context, and includes adoption of this mechanism by an in-process profiler, demonstrating applicability beyond eBPF-based readers
```

Reviewer: Applied in 009fafa5e9f252f098697d929cc7faa84dcc5ff7
